Hi,
silence.
Just as a little bit of a opening, uh,
we had a great visit to, uh,
is really cool when you saw some, uh, great examples with,
uh, Tahi as well as RA with what they're doing there.
And obviously, uh, it's, it shows that the, the, the policy,
the program that you've got there is,
is working really well.
So I just want to allay the, perhaps come the farm.
This is, this is really just filling the gap
that perhaps we perhaps didn't quite get the opportunity
to discuss with, uh, the people that were on the ground.
And, and that's just basically closing the loop from the
policy here in Wellington
and the delivery of the outcomes out in the field.
And we've seen both those sides of it.
So really, uh, today's conversation is, uh, uh,
regional delivery and, uh, you know, looking at,
at questions such as how are you identifying the entities
that you, you choosing to talk to and in an enabling and,
and the whole process through that localness part of it,
but the actual, uh, the policy, you know, the, uh,
uh, framework, we understand, uh, what that's all about.
Uh, so just with that, we, we, what have we got here?
We've got, uh, according to me, we have got half an hour,
uh, with you itself.
So, uh, maybe you wanna make some opening comments
before we perhaps get into a little bit
of a discussion about it.
So where you go?
I'm the Deputy Secretary Strategy.
Uh, I'm here with my colleagues, uh, Kelsey Jones.
She's the regional director from Waikato
and Karen McInnis, who is the general manager
of our investments.
And, uh, part of those investments that we saw
on the ground, uh, behind us.
Uh, we are also joined by other leadership from, uh, uh,
today continues that, uh,
as you mentioned on our approaches.
And, uh, in July we did talk about our policy approach
and then, um, our delivery approach in, uh,
on the, on the ground.
And we can begin with a, a recap, uh, very short. Sure.
Um, and then Kelsey will talk to the work, uh,
that she does in the region.
And then Karen can also talk, um, to the work in her role
and that she's based here.
But there we do, uh, both investments, um, regionally
and nationally as well.
Correct. And we can use those two examples we saw
to, to discuss that.
Thank you. Uh, and we'll reinforce this.
There is a no wrong door approach.
And then, uh, I think once we've talked to, um, to that,
we can pause, uh,
and then, um, happy to take the, any questions
that we may have missed from there.
Uh, there were some, uh, slides,
but it was, um, more just
to recap there we have our two approaches
and, uh, you, I've mentioned those.
Our delivery approach, uh, which is whanau centered,
locally led and government enabled,
and our policy approach of TU
or, uh, in ua, you meet the two entities, uh, Tora North
and Tahi Kii.
Uh, they demonstrate what is possible when Maori led
solutions are backed by targeted government support.
And tki, HC was the first entity we visited.
Uh, and, um, there are Maori land, uh, incorporation
and they administer 22 land blocks
for over a thousand shareholders.
And Tora North is AUA trust, uh,
with significant land holdings, primarily northeast of
to near Lake awa.
Uh, Kelsey and Karen will provide more
details, uh, on those.
Uh, so I will, um, hand over to Kelsey to continue Got it.
Ua, uh, today I'll briefly highlight
how our approaches were applied to the, uh, to the sites
that you visited in August for delivery of whanau centered,
locally led government enabled.
These investments reflect our approach
because they are wau centered
by supporting Maori ownership and expertise.
They're locally led, driven by strong governance,
and they're government enabled with investment,
exhilarating process progress,
and unlocked broader opportunities.
These examples show how our approach delivers real impact
that are Maori led, sustainable
and grounded in whanau aspirations for both
to North and tki.
The focus was on overcoming long standing barriers
to investment, such as limited access to capital
regulatory complexities and gaps in technical capabilities.
Our support enabled them to navigate consenting processes,
secure expert advice,
and attract investment to unlock
economic potential on the ua.
Both proposals reflect issues faced by Maori as citizens
that is ensuring their access to equal opportunity.
Um, as you know, that is, um, Maori Investment Consortium.
It's led by to North.
Um, they've, um, browed our investment
and is made up of the commercial arms of 19 iwi
trusts and other Maori entities.
So the collective approach that they have aims
to address the systemic barriers to Maori investments, such
as the high transaction costs,
limited cash reliance on consultancy firms
and lack of access to expertise.
This is particular case for some of those smaller iwi.
You have, um, very limited funds on their own to, um, invest
on behalf of their beneficiaries.
So the Maori Development Fund, um,
co-invested just under a million dollars
with a similar investment from the til collective
for a 12 month pilot.
Um, so how we worked, uh,
this initiative was worked up at a national level in line
with our no wrong door approach,
but through the relationships
that we'd built up across the mortar
with the founding groups that make up to, so along
with tota, that's the likes of au au, um, we had na,
awa, um, some of those type entities
and also with New Zealand Trade and Enterprise.
So New Zealand trade and Enterprise had taken, um,
a collective of, um, iwi
and Land Trust to a big investment conference.
And, and part of that, they came up with a barrier
of actually how do the collective eyes to be able
to come together to invest, to have more impact.
Um, so we worked alongside them
and NZTE to see how could Bernie come in
and enable that investment, um, to bring the coalition
of the willing together, so to speak,
other agencies were not able to provide
that funding support, um, that TY can
to actually build the capability of those entities.
Um, this is really important across all our investments.
Um, we need to make sure that we're not duplicating
what other agencies can do.
Mm-hmm. Um, we thought it was a really cost effective way
of working with the collective
to address those common barriers that they all face.
The pilot was successful, the membership
of the collective went from six originals to 19 members
with a strong shared investment pipeline.
Um, to date around a million dollars
of in public investment has unlocked a hundred million
dollars in New Zealand owned infrastructure, um,
with more deals still in progress.
So that's infrastructure that's going
to stay in New Zealand hands
with the collective on the board of the entity talk
to the members have grown and measurably from peer support
and learning from each other's
successes and their challenges.
It's a real ka Maori approach, um, learning
by actively participating in deals.
Um, we were thinking forward when we, um,
worked into this investment.
Um, we included an evaluation as part of the process
to ensure that we could get insights
that could inform policy,
but also we could, um, work out
how they could work towards becoming self-sufficient.
So self-sustaining, um, relying on less government funding
for that capability support.
We, we'll just go back to, um, Kelsey,
who's gonna talk more about doing the role as well.
So why Taki eight C?
So Taki eight C is a proven Maori Landon corporation
with a strong delivery record
and a clear vision for economic transformation.
The Green Energy Hub includes a number
of bold multi-phase energy initiatives, such as geothermal,
hydro, and the opportunity for diesel production.
Grounded in UA Maori co-invested
$810,000,
and to date TKI eight C had contributed over 3 million
of their own skin in the game.
The project has the opportunity with a potential
to bring $125 million of international investment
and unlock 1,300 jobs.
Additionally, it will provide 85%
of the region's electricity demand in the region
that imports 80% of its electricity.
This initiative directly aligns
with our investment priority one, improving productivity
of Maori asset and supports broader government goals
around energy, resilience, job creation,
and regional development.
Our regional lead engagement, we are from the community.
We know the community needs,
we know the system and we support.
We are supported by our national team who provide policy
and a coordinated expertise.
We support Iwi, hapu,
and Maori communities to navigate the system
through brokering, through connecting with other agencies
to help unlock opportunities.
We facilitate connections with economic agencies such
as NPI, kawa, NCTE
to align opportunities and to unlock co-investment.
This funding for TKI eight C has enabled TKI
to work through the fast check approval process,
the RMA process and support stakeholder consultation
and prepare key documents.
This is a clear example of
how Whanau centered locally led government enabled
supports or enables Maori led infrastructure
that delivers long-term regional benefits.
Um, yeah, you wanna, we'll pause there. Okay.
Uh, if you've got some questions Sure.
Just before too, can you pop
Outside and just ask the,
sorry, a bit noisy.
Don't get It. Hey, thank you very much.
It's, it, it's great.
And just a, a bit of a starter, uh, for me.
Um, clearly you've got some, uh, we, we've,
we've observed two successful, quite large entities.
You know, we're talking, uh, it's not, it's not small stuff.
So is there a threshold for where the framework works
and where it doesn't work?
Like, do you understand the question there? Mm-hmm.
It's almost like, uh, what are we actually, uh, reaching out
to and what are we not reaching out to?
Mm-hmm.
Um, the, there is no, the, the threshold that we have
with our investment plan is a minimum
investment of a hundred thousand.
So these, these ones are quite large, so a million, um,
and over 800 for, for, um, Tahiti Sea.
So we're aiming at around about a hundred thousand
because we think that's kind of the sweet spot
because we're trying to, in order
to make a funding go further, um, we're also,
and pick the ones that we know are gonna
show return on investment.
Um, we do, um, require some co-investment from,
from Mount Kai, from those we're investing in.
Right. Um, so it's generally, um, there are some exceptions,
but generally you're trying to work with,
if we put a hundred thousand dollars in,
we'd expect a hundred
Thousand. So how would you
describe on what Maori entities
are not reaching the, how would you bracket that?
So, so basically, um, I think
what you've described is you have to be quite a size
before you can actually tap into this.
I'm trying to identify what, what is missed out on your,
So, I, I think in terms of what we're trying to reach
with our investment plan, so our, so our, um,
investments are anchored off our investment plan.
So investment plan is really much about,
there are two priorities here.
One, the first one is improving the productivity of iwi
or Maori assets and co-invest and infrastructure.
So, so that's, um, they're generally investments
around a hundred thousand dollars or over.
So it's things like, um, increasing the productivity of UA
or other Maori assets
and closer diversification into new areas
or, um, such as renewable energy, um, really trying to,
um, increase the utilization
or underperform performing assets.
So they have to come to the table with some capital.
It's a, you're leveraging, uh, that they've had.
Yes. And, and, but generally too, we're trying
to pathway them on to larger investment.
Mm-hmm. So for the rif, for example, um,
or other private investment.
So helping kind of build the, the business case like,
in order to be able to do that.
So they've generally got something,
but some of our iwi who are a little bit smaller
or haven't settled, then we will look at that,
we'll look at some inkind support
or what they may have put in in the
future in, sorry, in the past.
Okay. At the regional level, Kelsey, uh, do you see
that there's some entities that's got potential
but are not quite, you know, are there, do you, um, observe
missed opportunities with how the framework's set itself
because of, because of that, you know, those thresholds?
Yes, we do. Um,
and I guess that's where the point of, uh,
the opportunity such as collective
and the collective advising of entities coming together,
that's a, um, at a regional level
because of our local intelligence
and our ability to, one, be from the community,
but also, uh, provide a, a facilitation
of bringing entities together.
Yes. To answer your question, yes, there are times,
but we work with entities to bring them together, such
as to collective. Yeah.
I'm sorry. The other thing I might excuse to say is
that we do have a portion of our funding, well, these two,
um, investment priorities focus on economic development.
We do also have, um, a portion of, of funding that we use
for what we call community resilience.
So that can be kind of to build the capability
of groups to get there.
A lot of that focus is on marae, um,
has been on emergency preparedness, it's been on and skills
and development, and,
and also providing the ability for regions who, who know
what the needs aspirations are in each region
to work out the proposals that, that align
with their regional priorities, the communities.
Um, thanks Mr. Chair.
Um, and thanks for pointing out the difference in, um,
the biggies versus the average Maori land trust.
Um, because there's a significant difference in the
challenges that we face.
Um, and you've spoken to the community resilience fund,
which is good for community and for marai.
What specifically in the f maori space do we
have in terms of that?
So you've got scale with the biggies, like the,
and then you've got some like kind, uh, stronger ones,
but not quite to that scale.
Do you have, um, that UA Maori funding that can help those
who are sort of sweet spot middle trying to elevate
and get a bit more to scale?
Can they be prioritized within the funding that
We're talking about? Yes, they
can. Yeah. I think, um, it's important for me
to hear that, that the, um, the entities
that you visited were the big ones.
Um, yeah, they're big. They,
they were our kind of shiny light ones.
The ones that it's easy to say, Hey,
this is the return on investment.
But definitely what we're trying to do is,
is support those smaller and middle ones to get there.
So
We also have, um, made an investment with,
to help a number of smaller, um, uh, funeral blocks to
go through the pre-feasibility feasibility business case.
And that's been going for around about 12 months.
And there's a number of those blocks
that in our investment ready for other, um, agencies
to pick up the support or private investors.
Um, are you able to give us an overview in terms
of the allocation of spend regionally?
Uh, where, where are we looking at the
funding dropping across the,
Uh, yes, we can, uh, but we haven't got it here, so
It'd be good to get a map Yeah.
So that we can see, you know, maybe is benefiting heaps,
could all be in district.
Oh,
We do have that.
Um, so from last year, um, the majority, so there was
around about 13 million, um, the MA
actually about 8 million we took, um, the remaining, um,
regions had between three to 5 million per region.
How much do you think, uh, governance, uh,
capacity quality governance as a constraint for where
that spends going itself?
Because we have a, a whole lot
of different maturities mm-hmm.
Of, of the entities
and I think one of the, uh, areas
that the committee's interested, building the capacity,
building the governance capacity,
sometimes just starting a governance for an entity,
how much do, do you see that as that one
of the bigger constraints for being able to, uh,
step into the conversations regionally
with other entities itself? Comments on that?
Uh, we do have some in kind, um, examples as well.
Are you able to talk to some
of the in kind governance training?
So you are looking at building governance capability
within entities as well.
You, you, you are proactively funding
on funding that as well. Mm-hmm.
We funded that through, uh, a range of, um, resources
so we can use community resilience fund funding
for smaller entities.
Yep. Even, um, a portion
of talk about it was going towards governance around,
um, informed decision making.
Yeah. And, um, yeah, generally the governance funding, um,
is funded through the community resilience.
If it's just that, if it's part of a, one
of those bigger programs where they've, you know,
got the iron prize and they, sorry, can I just interrupt?
I've got this always behind me
and I, I just think
I've got ears closer.
You can hit one. We go to the hospital. Sorry.
It'll do it.
No, I'm nervous. Um, uh,
That's better. Thank you.
It's very, yeah. Um,
So I was saying that, um, as part of those,
those larger programs like, uh, a TKI
or a, if, if there are governance needs, we can support that
as part of that over rural border package, which is one
of the duties I think of our, um, ability
to be quite flexible in that regard and more holistically
Yeah. Wanting to un
tap off that as well,
because, um, for instance, you might have those
that aren't necessarily startup completely,
but um, you know, they might wanna get a master plan
for their, um, those feasibilities
to then do something with it.
Um, your existing f Maori service is still strong
and available and capable.
Uh, we, we, our Fen Maori service, um,
essentially all our staff in our regions are, are expected
to be able to work in, in that fen space.
We do have some staff in each region too. It's
Been generalized now, right? Yeah.
But we do have staff in regions who have,
do have specific skills
and say, um, business development around exporting focus,
but also around, um, they're in our regions,
but they, we expect our staff to be able
to work on a whole range of things.
But, but definitely, um, ENO is always a, a focus
for us no matter what you're doing.
Even it's the productivity of assets
or trying to increase export revenue, you know, it,
it's all about, about the assets
and ENO is, is a big part of that.
And I guess to add to that, Karen,
that regional perspective, it goes back to our, um,
our local intelligence
and the ability to, um,
that is anchored in our high trust relationships.
So we are from the uri, we know the community needs,
and often in a regional level, we work in those spaces.
So again, um, we're able to, uh,
bring in our high trust relationships work closely,
whether it's governance, capability, uplift,
and what we do is we provide the insight,
we gather the regional, um, insight,
and we provide it to our national team, whether
that's providing, um, insightful policy, whether
that's providing insight for our, uh, investment strategy.
So that's one part. The next part, uh, another separate to
that is being able to, uh, support our, um, Maori groups
to navigate the system.
Yeah. Whether that is beyond investment
of our own capability of the, of us as an investment,
the regional coma here as an investment, as well
as working alongside our other, um, agencies such as NPI,
Kawa Corp,
And that reach back, I think into, we do have a lot
of those skills in the, um, in the head
and the national, at the national level as well.
And if we need to, then we can, uh,
support those regions with what they need.
And also, I think really importantly is trying
to coordinate across agencies,
because if we can all invest in the same projects
to accelerate and not every agency can invest.
So for example, NPI will provide, um, expert advice on where
to put a PAC Farm, um, but I can't necessarily
and invest in it, and we can come in
and support some of that due diligence.
Mm-hmm. Um, and then attracting investors, um,
as local investors, NZTE,
but they also have Invest New Zealand. I
Was just gonna ask about that. Mm.
Yeah. 'cause the coordination
and I, the navigation point
of TPK is really needed in the regions.
Mm. Because often whanau don't know how
to go from place one place to another.
Um, in respect to what you're seeing
and how you are feeling, um, you know, that desire
for navigation are government departments open to, you know,
sitting down and having some meetings to try
and have a bit of not shared services,
but coordinate better the way
that you can go out in a joint way in a joined up approach.
Can we just expand on that?
Are they proactive and come to you? Yeah.
Yeah. They already did.
Yes. Definitely. And, and, uh, um,
and Kelsey can talk to this from a regional level,
but actually it, it's at a regional level.
Those agencies need to get together.
Um, and, and Kelsey's region, they all meet
over their proposals.
And then a national level we need to coordinate as well.
'cause some of the things we are finding is that, um,
from a regional level, these projects are guys,
once they get to an agent, some agencies national level,
but not even on the pipeline. So
It's really quiet. Mm-hmm.
Yes. So, so we are working and,
and our agencies, if they, a lot
of them are coming into our national office
because, um, some of the, particularly the really
tricky kind of, um, larger investments
that coming in national office, but the first thing we are
doing is, is following it back out
through our regional office and coordinating regional
and national, um, across all agencies. Okay.
Um, at a regional level, what occurs is we have a, um,
a collective of agencies made up of Kawa, N-P-I-N-Z-T-E
and invest in New Zealand.
Um, and we meet every month to discuss pipelines
to discuss the opportunity.
We look for things like, what is the return
on investment for our region?
What is the opportunity for Maori to, to invest in this?
And it's not looking at Maori as, uh, ticking in,
in the consenting process.
It's actually looking at Maori
as co-investors to the opportunity.
And so as agencies, we meet together
to identify the opportunity. Mm-hmm.
Very good. So, um, amongst some of the, uh, challenges
that you've identified, Kelsey, about the likes
of capital constraints, you also talked about likes of, uh,
regulatory constraints as well.
Can you just evolve that conversation a bit better?
Sorry. Are you able to, uh, re-ask the,
Well, it was, it was about you.
You, you mentioned that sometimes, uh,
reg regulations gets in the way of progress.
Mm-hmm. Um, I'm just trying to get an understanding
of perhaps some more of the specifics of what that may be
for our committee's understanding.
So, uh, are there regulatory, uh, impediments or challenges
or hurdles, uh,
that are getting in the way of your progress?
I'm trying to see
what is stopping you from going faster mm-hmm. This
Good mahi that you're doing. Mm-hmm.
Okay.
Uh, so in terms of regulatory issues, it's around, um,
legislation such as, so the complexity of,
of the consenting process
and enabling Maori to participate in that.
Um, and the delay of that progress.
We also talk about the complexities of UA Maori
and it being multiply owned.
Yep. And the, um, and its ability not to be able to,
or sorry, not to be able to,
but, um, uh, barriers to development
and the struggle of development versus, uh,
maintaining the UA in a space.
Uh, the other part goes back to the point of governance.
Yes. Governance capability. Yeah.
Yeah. I think that's also why our policy colleagues are
so important to, to feed.
And that's the beauty about having those high trust
relationships is, is when you invest in a community, you,
you are, you're in there for the, the long haul
where you're actually, you get invited to the meetings, you,
you, you're collecting those insights.
Mm-hmm. You, uh, you are feeding them through.
Um, so that's a, a policy colleagues in national office,
we are feeding those policy insights through to them
directly from our Kai tunnels, um, to work through some
of those barriers with other agencies policy, um,
And, um, the secretary policy.
So just No, no, that's right.
Its, um, so just as an example,
if we think about the recent, uh, engagement around, uh,
in relation to the amendments to, one of the things
that we were able to do
because of the regional connections is look to, uh,
those exemplar organizations
or look to them through the relationships to people
who we would really like to hear from, make sure
that we hear from, with respect to those amendments.
And I could see that tki, HC and, um, Taha North both
provided, um, uh, input into, through the,
through the consultation process.
Yeah. Uh, with relation, in relation to those amendments.
And so some of the examples that they pulled out, um,
in relation to those proposed amendments were things
like governance.
Um, so that they could, they could see that
as the proposals while saying, um,
that it would create greater autonomy, um,
for governance entities.
What it might, what the proposals might also do is create
some, uh, instability or uncertainty
because there was going to a proposal to lower the threshold
of, uh, shareholder initiated investigations, as well
as the ability for the Maori land court to be able to, um,
uh, seek an investigation.
So their feedback was, that's, uh, kind of seems to be
counter to, um, what you are trying to, um,
achieve, which is greater autonomy
for the particular entity.
Yep. Um, similarly, there was, uh, discussions, uh, support
for, there was a proposal in the current amendments,
which was around, um, 99 year leases.
And one of the entities actually said that,
that would be much better for us, um, to be able to do that.
We wouldn't have to have the court,
um, involved in that decision making.
So we do support that proposal.
So, um, by undertaking the work that we do
through the investments
and so forth, it also has another additional piece,
which is we reach out to those entities
and say, what do you think about those proposals?
And we can, we can take some of those forward
as part of our advice to government.
Excellent. Well, unfortunately, our times come to an end,
but I think, uh, today has been very valuable.
It's just, just filled that little gap
that we're missing as a committee.
And can I just pass on, um, congratulations, uh,
for the framework that, that this is, and,
and Kelsey, for the work that we observe there in, in rot,
uh, of what that's delivering, it's, it's, it's, uh,
hitting the mark of what we see is really positive.
So, so well done for that.
But thank you very much for coming before us
and we'll leave you guys to it.
Thank you very much. Thank you for your continued support.
Thank you. Thank you, Kiana. Oh.